[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> At the beginning
of the 1900s,
humanity was being influenced
by photographs, newspapers,
stage plays, and silent films.
During the 1930s,
the major studios
began creating motion
pictures with sound,
bringing these stories
closer to real life.
By the 1960s, color television
became a novelty item
for several families.
Thousands of people could
be influenced simultaneously
by highly edited
stories, giving them
a longer glimpse into
alternate realities
that stage plays and
artwork couldn't do.
The race for space was underway.
And humans began wondering
if contact with other worlds
could actually be possible.
As the late 1960s
swept the planet,
more and more humans began
to awaken to the possibility
of a greater reality.
And the shades were opened
on the occult secrets
held in the libraries.
And new messages began
filling the shelves.
Channel texts became
more and more available.
And the occult labels
and misconceptions
about this mysterious form
of spiritual communication
began piling up.
It was becoming a phenomenon.
>> My interest in the occult
began when I was growing up
in the 1970s in the borough
of Queens in New York City.
I was fascinated with mythology
and folklore, the paranormal,
the supernatural.
I vividly remember
my sister coming home
with books about Bigfoot
and flying saucers
and the works of
Carlos Castaneda.
I was very interested
in astrology.
I wanted to know where
all this came from.
>> I grew up in a house
that was so haunted,
you would set something
down, turn around,
it would disappear.
We'd be watching TV,
back in the old days,
where there was a
physical dial that you
had to stand up, walk across
the room, and turn the knob.
Well, while we're sitting
down on the couch watching TV,
the knob would turn.
We would hear footsteps
going up and down
the hallway, toilets
flushing downstairs when
we were upstairs.
It was just so overwhelmingly
paranormal, it was crazy.
When I started
telling my parents,
I'm seeing these things,
I'm communicating
with these things, my
parents were like, OK.
We need to go back to our
old church, which turned out
to be a spiritualist church,
which is your typical stand up,
sit down, stand up, sit
down, stand up, sing.
But services ended when one
to three mediums would go up
on stage, go into a
deep trance, and spirits
would channel through them.
Every Saturday night
in the church basement,
we were doing seances.
I grew up with this everywhere.
Now, mind you, also, my parents'
basement was full of books.
I could read about
anything that I wanted to.
And one of the books that
stuck out the most to me
was Manly P. Hall's "Secret
Teaching of all Ages."
And as a young teenager,
I'm devouring this book,
going, wow.
These are the secrets
that I've been after.
This is what the Whisperers
have been talking to me about.
Whisperers were my guide.
I'm like, I get it.
Somebody's writing
about this stuff.
>> Well, growing up Christian,
we believed the Bible was
channeled by the Holy Spirit.
We just didn't use that word.
The word "channeling" is usually
associated with the occult
and mysticism and
things that religion
tends to shy away from.
But if you ask any good
Christian to explain
how the Bible is
written, they'll
say, oh, the Holy Spirit
possessed one's mind
without them knowing it
and wrote through them
the words that it
wanted to write.
And I said, well, that sounds
a whole lot like channeling.
So it's really just different
words for the same thing.
If you want to call
it "inspiration,"
that word can be used as well.
But I think, especially
in religious circles,
the word "channeling" inspires
occultism and things like that.
So they think it's a
word that's off-limits.
But it's actually, in my
estimation, exactly what
they believe of the Bible.
>> Several legendary stories
throughout religion have been
delivered through humans hearing
voices and carving or writing
down the messages.
This practice continued,
as oracles, prophets,
and poets shared their
messages through pen and paper
and eventually the typewriter.
The practice of
automatic writing
is another highly debated
form of channeling that has
several different meanings.
But the question remains.
Who is moving the hands
and writing the message?
>> In terms of the modern
age, automatic writing is one
of the most popular
forms of mediumship.
And it was very popular
in the United States
and Europe, going back
to the mid-19th century,
where an individual seated with
a piece of paper and a writing
implement, would feel that he
or she was receiving some kind
of extra physical information.
And probably the most popular
channel text in modern history,
"A Course in Miracles," can
be considered the result
of automatic writing.
A research psychologist
named Helen Schucman
at Columbia University
in the 1960s
began to hear
clairaudient voices.
And she composed an
extraordinary comprehensive
complex spiritual
psychology that
later came to be called
"A Course in Miracles."
And it's probably the
most popular channel text
in modern history.
>> There's nothing that I would
call ordinary audition about
this at all.
It's a curious thing.
And it will be very
difficult to explain.
Somebody asked me, was it as
though your hand was moving?
No.
I wrote perfectly
voluntarily, in response to--
I call it a voice, but
a voice has sounds--
or sounds as though it has
something to do with hearing.
I didn't hear anything.
I think it's the sort of hearing
that you can't really describe.
It doesn't have anything
to do with ears or waves
hitting a drum or
anything on that order.
I don't really know.
I think maybe I'm using the
wrong word when I say "hear."
I think "knew" may be a
better word than "heard."
I sort of recognized it.
It came very easily, very
rapidly, very smoothly.
If I didn't catch a phrase, I
could sort of say "would you
mind doing that again?"
>> The story is
truly remarkable,
in that Helen Schucman,
in the early 1960s,
she was working with
a colleague, Dr.
William Thetford.
And they had worked together
for many, many years
in this field of psychology.
Helen Schucman began having
psychic dreams, very, very
vivid dreams that she said it
"felt like some kind of entity
was contacting me."
And for her, being an
atheist, of course,
this felt very
bizarre and she almost
didn't wanna tell
anybody about it.
But she confided in
her colleague and said,
I'm having these dreams
of an entity coming
to me that wants to
bring a message through
and it feels like it
has a lot of authority.
And I want to obey it,
but I don't know how
to bring this message through.
And so William said, well,
next time you get this message,
just say yes to it
and start writing.
And we'll read it together.
And if it sounds crazy,
we'll throw it in the fire
and never talk about it.
So that's what Helen did.
The first message of
"A Course in Miracles"
came through, which
Helen describes
as "an inner voice"
that spoke to her
and said, "This is a
course in miracles.
Please take notes."
>> This is strictly mental.
Otherwise, I would consider
it hallucinatory activity.
I don't feel it was that.
It wasn't my voice.
It couldn't have
been, because it
talked about a whole area with
which I am entirely unfamiliar.
For some reason
or other, it never
occurred to me not to do this.
I thought that this
should be done.
I made every effort
to keep it without me.
I did not want to intrude on it.
And I felt that it was a matter
of personal integrity not to.
I really did not
interfere with it.
>> And so she wrote for seven
years, almost every day,
chapter upon chapter of
a book that's, to many
people's opinion, probably the
most profound channeled work
ever came through her,
which was a sort of form
of psychotherapy, using the
biblical gospel language that
lays down this philosophy
of how to be in the world,
how to see one another
as one, not separate,
and how forgiveness actually
is the path to heaven,
that the only way to get to
heaven is through the person
right in front of me.
Because heaven is
entered two by two.
And Helen herself
said she wasn't
the best student of the course.
She wasn't very good at
living this philosophy, which,
to me, just speaks even
more about the validity
of the channeling itself,
that this wasn't something
she could've made up herself.
>> I think the thing that I
found upsetting about it was it
went against
everything I believe,
which is very hard to do.
But I felt it was
much more important--
I know what I believe.
But I didn't know what
this was going to do next.
>> Schucman identified
herself as the scribe,
but not as the author.
And she made this work
freely available to people.
And it first began circulating
through small study groups
and then, later, was
published in the early 1970s
and went on to become
a worldwide phenomenon.
>> There are a number of reasons
that "A Course in Miracles"
displays so much spiritual
genius in the way that
it's written.
One can read this
text and, even if you
don't know the
language yet, you can
read it and go, my goodness.
This is profound.
There's something
alive in this text
and it starts to pull on you.
And you want to learn
the language system.
And so the "Course" is
a truly channel text
in that, just like all
true channel texts,
it will meet you where you're
at, spiritually speaking.
And you'll understand what
you're ready to understand.
But the deeper you go
in your development,
the deeper the book goes.
And so that's why
channeled text, especially
like "A Course in
Miracles," are texts
that people return to
again and again for decades
and decades of their life.
And every time you read it,
it feels like you've never
read it before.
>> But I hadn't
caught up with it yet.
And I don't understand it.
And I still feel
very baffled by it.
I do think, and under
certain circumstances,
I think there are
questions I could probably
write an answer to.
According to the
"Course," we should
and everyone could ask about
anything and get an answer.
>> Now, even if one takes a hard
core materialist view of life
and says, look, there's no
such thing as extra physical
cognition.
That's all delusion.
She was writing this
down from her own psyche,
from her own subconscious,
let's go with that for a moment.
Let's go with the
materialist point of view.
That doesn't reduce, by one
iota, the extraordinary nature
of Schucman's accomplishment.
If a work as complex, as
moving, as rich, as insightful
as "A Course in Miracles"
came from the subconscious
of a research psychologist,
a self-professed atheist, who
just sat down and
took notes, what
does that tell us
about the unknown folds
of our own psyches?
At a certain point, the
materialist or immaterialist
argument almost
becomes irrelevant.
Does it really matter whether a
skeptic or I agree or disagree
about the nature of the source?
Look at the result.
>> Another influential woman
who was raised near the famous
Burned Over District in upstate
New York was Jane Roberts.
In the early 1960s, she and
her partner, Robert Butts,
began experimenting
with a Ouija board.
>> We borrowed a Ouija board.
We didn't even buy one.
And after, I forget, once
or twice or something,
we started to get
stuck on the board.
The pointer would go over the
alphabet and spell messages.
>> OK.
>> And after a while, the
messages said they came from
a personality called "Seth."
The first thing I
thought of was, well,
it's the subconscious.
Robert's pushing it
or Robert's saying--
>> Yeah.
>> --I was pushing it.
So we went through that long--
>> Yes.
>> --kind of thing.
And after only maybe five or
six, seven sessions with it,
Seth came through vocally.
I would start to know
what was going to be said.
And then, I would
start to want to speak.
I just began speaking
the words automatically,
for Seth, without
knowing what I was saying
until I came out of trance.
There was no training per se
for this, no self-hypnosis,
nothing.
It just came.
Although, I did give consent.
That is-- had I not wanted to do
it, it wouldn't have happened.
But I was so curious.
I wanted to know
what was happening.
>> The revolutionary
book "Seth Speaks"
was published in the early
1970s and went on to become part
of the game-changing 32-book
collection referred to as "The
Seth Material."
>> The first time I heard about
the idea of channeling was when
I came across Jane Roberts
and "The Seth Material."
And that's when
that word sort of
started sticking in the
nomenclature of the New Age
movement.
>> When I was a kid, one of my
mom's favorite books was "Seth
Speaks."
Seth is a higher
level spirit that
was being channeled
through Jane Roberts.
Now, Jane Roberts was
one of those fun people
that didn't know she had these
abilities, just it came on
like a flash, like a blip of
information coming through.
So she figured, OK.
This is a spirit trying to talk.
I should do what everyone else
does, grab the Ouija board.
And that worked.
That worked for a while.
But then she realized she
was more of a mental medium
and that the spirit was
speaking through her doing,
the automatic writing thing,
communicating with her.
So she was writing
all of these books
as Seth channeling through her.
>> My consciousness
was just gone.
And it wasn't an
out-of-body in the respect
that I had another body.
I thought I did.
But I just came through the
window and then into the leaves
and into everything.
And it wasn't until I came
back that I found the script
and realized that I
had to have written it.
I wasn't aware of my body at
all or the manuscript or writing
or anything.
But the thing of it was that
the stuff that was in the script
was stuff I had felt
while I was out.
But when I was out, I would
go into atoms and molecules.
And I felt their consciousness.
But then, when I
read the script,
it was terribly hard to
accept portions of it.
Because it pretty much went
against what I've been taught.
>> One of the biggest messages
from Seth that I think is
so profound is that
we create our reality,
whatever our inner world is,
whatever we think, believe,
and feel, we're projecting that
outward and that we'll find
ways to make that reality
conform to our belief and that
we create that.
And my mom loved these books.
She talked about
Seth all the time.
And I think that was
one of the things that
kept her positive
throughout her life
and her spiritual
development is these lessons
that came from Seth
through Jane Roberts.
Just really enhanced
her spiritual work
and her spiritual practices.
Simply just by knowing
this information
helped her out dramatically.
>> People, you might use them
or think of them as symbols.
Or no matter how
you say to them,
they have their own
fantastic individuality.
And whenever any beliefs, even
our own, blind you to that,
you have lost.
Whenever you relate to someone
as simply a belief or you get
your back up and you don't see
their reality, then we've won.
It will bring you
closer to people.
It will not divide you.
If it divides you,
that is not what it is.
>> Jane Roberts' material, the
one thing that sticks with me
is "the point of
power is the now."
And I think that was a
pivotal piece of information
for everybody to hear.
And so I began to realize,
maybe I could do that myself.
And so when I did start
going into medicine work,
I would be having these things
come forth that were well
beyond my pay grade.
I thought, this
is Hindu material
at the essence of these
philosophical teachings
and so forth.
And that was thrilling
too, because I
think it's important for
people, and especially women,
to feel like they
can be bringing forth
this high-level philosophical
information as well.
>> Interestingly enough,
"The Seth Material"
came out at the right time.
It was in the '60s,
where people were already
starting to explore alternate
paths of spirituality.
They were starting to
question Orthodox religion.
And they're clamping
down on what
spiritual practice has to be.
So people were now
open and trying
to explore some of
this extra material.
They wanted to know what
the nature of spirituality
versus religion was.
So "The Seth Material"
came in at the right time
to actually spawn
that New Age movement
that the spiritual world
can be peace, love,
and light and happiness, that
you can achieve these higher
states of being without
the rigorous orthodoxy,
that you can be that
conduit of spiritual growth,
rather than some church telling
that you have to do it our way
and that's the only way.
So the timing of
"Seth's Material"
was perfect to spawn this
whole New Age movement,
so that we could actually
tune in and become
our own spiritual teachers.
>> Now, I don't call
Seth a spirit guide.
I never thought of Seth as
some white cloaked spirit
who was just floating around.
Part of my life's
work certainly is
to try to understand the
nature of our personalities,
our personalities, what
abilities we've got,
what happens so that we can
get this kind of information.
And one of the things
that I really hope
is that people would begin
to trust their own revelatory
experience and not automatically
cloak it in whatever dogma
they believe in.
>> Jane Roberts, I think,
was really someone who opened
the door for a lot of people
to know that they could
investigate these things,
that there are some profound
differences in states of beings
that humans can get into.
And certainly,
"The Seth Material"
was really quite amazing
and quite distinct
from almost anything else that
was out there at the time.
I think she's
generally considered
sort of the mother
of modern channeling.
And I know a lot of channels
have sort of gravitated
to the way she presented herself
in a certain way and so have I.
She was very, in a sense,
irreverent about it,
which was interesting.
Because I know she smoked.
I know she drank
a beer before she
channeled to loosen herself up.
And different people
have different ways
of getting into that state.
And if she felt she
needed to just lose
a little bit of her
inhibitions to do so,
well, then that's
what worked for her.
But I think that the fundaments
of "The Seth Material,"
the core information in
"The Seth Material," I think
you'll find that in almost any
channel now, because it really,
for the first time, I think,
in modern times, touched
on a lot of those core
principles that, I mean, truth
is truth.
They may be said in
slightly different ways
by different channels or
different philosophers
at different times, but I think
"The Seth Material" really laid
out the foundation for what the
core principles of metaphysics
were really all about.
Real metaphysics, not
just outdated ideas,
but the core of metaphysics.
The idea of channeling
uses the same mechanism.
It's just it depends
upon the theme
that the person chose,
the agreements that
were made, so on and so forth.
But Seth is a multidimensional,
nonphysical being
at this time, who has
experiences in physical reality
as well.
So the knowledge gathered from
all those experiences collected
back into what you might call a
type of oversoul, that can then
share those experiences
from a different perspective
as the collected
self, through beings,
like Jane Roberts, that
are open to receiving
such transmissions.
>> As these powerful channeled
messages created a strong
foundation for this
growing phenomenon,
these influential women ignited
the spirit of many to dive
deeper into the
nature of reality.
As most will discover, there
is one constant message
delivered throughout the ages.
>> The ancient wisdom, such as
the teachings of Vedic ancient
India, where we have
these beautiful texts,
which are basically
communications between wise
people and spiritual
intelligence that told them
of the nature, they intuited
it, they experienced it through
this multidimensional
communication,
the nature of reality itself,
that all is consciousness,
all is mind and consciousness,
all the way through the great
religious teachings, all the
way through to the more modern
channeled texts, such as the
texts of Seth and "A Course
in Miracles," almost all of them
speak that the deepest reality
of the universe is that of love.
And what now, I and others
are bringing forward,
with the evidence for such
unity expressed in diversity
is I sometimes call it
"the science of love."
So in that regard, I honor
all the incredible giants
on whose shoulders we
stand, whether they
be scientific giants,
spiritual, or in whatever way.
Because the scientific pioneers
also channeled, in many ways,
their own deeper understanding
of the nature of reality.
What I do feel is important
is to honor and receive
that wisdom, embody
it in our lives,
and then go on
our own adventure.
So not to be held within it
as that is the only way, that
is the only message.
Because when we look across
this vast panoply of wisdom,
we see both the unity of
its underlying perception
and we see the diversity
in which it's expressed.
And to continue that journey
in our own lives, I just feel,
is incredibly important.
>> When you look in the
mirror, you will see images
of yourself.
But you do not
perceive the inner self
that you know exists.
And as so, each of us
here, as each of you,
to realize that you have an
inner identity that you cannot
physically perceive and an inner
voice that you do not hear with
your ears.
Each of us here, therefore,
before you, to admit
the validity of your own being,
to enjoy the being that you see
and feel and touch,
and yet to realize
that you have a still
greater vitality and reality.